Ex-Patriot Kevin Turner’s children are battling the nurse who became his wife and heir
Turner died a year after marrying his nurse, who now gets his NFL pension, but his parents claim he wasn’t mentally fit to make decisions.


FOR FUTURE HOHLER STORY Myra and Raymond Turner, parents of pro football player Kevin Turner, visit the memorial for their son at the Kevin Turner Field, at the Stanley-Jensen Stadium, Prattville, Alabama. Turner's photograph is on the memorial. Turner's nickname was 
Kevin Turner’s parents, Myra and Raymond , visit a memorial to their son in Prattville, Ala.
Meg McKinney for The Boston Globe
AHNGESBIRMINGHAM, Ala. — On the morning of March 9, 2015, former Patriots fullback Kevin Turner was losing his struggle with an incurable brain disease. His parents, who had left their longtime home and moved in to care for him, saw his nurse guiding their terminally ill son out of his house in his wheelchair.

Turner, a divorced father of three minor children, was all but paralyzed. He was breathing through a tube in his neck, and he took nutrition through a tube to his stomach. His mother asked the nurse, Allison Sanford, where they were headed.

Turner, then 45, was the face of a class-action suit by thousands of National Football League veterans over brain damage they suffered playing the game. As the lead plaintiff, he had campaigned from his wheelchair for the league to compensate the afflicted and make the sport safer for future generations, including his son, Nolan, now a member of Clemson’s undefeated football team.

Advertisement

“The nurse said they were going shopping,” his mother, Myra Turner, recalled.

Instead, they went to a church, where Turner’s nurse became his wife — and heir.

Was it an act of devotion, as Allison Sanford Turner claims? Or the product of a caregiver’s greed, as Turner’s children contend?

Turner died a year after that private wedding. Only then did his children — Nolan, now 20, Natalie, 17, and Cole, 15 — learn that he had created a trust two days before he took his last breath. The trust made Allison Sanford Turner, who never lived with her husband, the sole beneficiary of his NFL pension for the rest of her life: $108,000 annually for four years, $43,200 a year thereafter.

Turner’s estate also was awarded $5 million when the NFL settled the class-action case after he died. The trust called for Sanford Turner to receive 35 percent of the payment, with his children left to equally divide 65 percent, after loans and other obligations were paid.

Advertisement

Allison Sanford Turner and Kevin Turner listened to testimony at a Senate Special Committee on Aging hearing in June 2014 regarding concussions and the long-term effects of brain-related sports injuries.
Allison Sanford Turner and Kevin Turner listened to testimony at a Senate Special Committee on Aging hearing in June 2014 regarding concussions and the long term effects of brain related sports injuries in June 2014.
Charles Dharapak/AP/File
For the children, the grief of watching their father wither in his final years has been compounded by losing much of the compensation for the disease and disabilities that led to his death to a woman they have not seen or heard from since his funeral, his parents said.

Now the children are fighting back, alleging in an Alabama court that the football-related disease that killed their father — chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), which Boston University researchers say caused him to develop a form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease) — rendered him mentally incompetent to marry his nurse and create an estate plan on his deathbed.

In the age of football and CTE, the Turner case represents yet another wrenching outcome for the family of a man who dedicated his life to the game and lost it to brain damage.

Get Sports Headlines in your inbox:
The most recent sports headlines delivered to your inbox every morning.
“It’s a big, tragic mess,” said Joyce Turner, his former wife and the children’s mother.

Joyce Turner, Kevin Turner’s first wife and the mother of his children, with her favorite photograph of him.
Joyce Turner, Kevin Turner’s first wife and the mother of his children, with her favorite photograph of him.
Meg McKinney for The Boston Globe
The children have asked a judge to annul the marriage and order Sanford Turner to forfeit her inheritance. Standing with them is an influential ally: Dr. Ann McKee, the director of Boston University’s CTE Center.


In October, McKee submitted an affidavit stating that she knew Turner well during the last five years of his life. She reported examining his brain and spinal cord postmortem and discovering he died with “severe and widespread CTE.”

“It is my learned opinion,” McKee stated, “that Kevin Turner lacked the mental capacity to make an informed decision concerning entering into a marriage contract.”

Sanford Turner, in her own affidavit, said her husband’s mind “remained sharp” until his death. She cast doubt on how well McKee knew him, and she said surrendering her inheritance would cause her “major financial difficulty” as she supports herself and her own three children.

Sanford Turner, through her attorney, declined to comment for this story. She lives in Dora, Ala., outside Birmingham, in a home she bought four months after Kevin Turner died. Records show she has received nearly $300,000 in NFL pension funds since his death.

Lawyer’s fee contested

In the days after the church ceremony, Kevin Turner told his family and friends about it. His charitable foundation made it public in a Facebook post a week after the marriage.

“Please join us in congratulating the newlyweds!!’’ the post said. “Crazy kids up and eloped!’’

But as the couple honeymooned at home, Kevin Turner’s family began wondering about the ethics of a registered nurse marrying him. Licensed health care workers are responsible for maintaining professional boundaries with their patients.

Turner’s children allege in their lawsuit that Sanford Turner “engaged in an ongoing romantic and sexual relationship with her patient in violation of Alabama Board of Nursing rules and regulations.”

Joyce Turner filed a complaint with the state board, citing the allegations, which Sanford Turner has denied. A spokeswoman for the nursing board declined to comment on the case, other than to say Sanford Turner remains licensed. Sanford Turner stated in June that she was working part-time at the University of Alabama-Birmingham.

Allison Sanford, then his nurse and later his wife, helps Kevin Turner change his shirt in a December 2014 photo, with the effects of ALS apparent on the former fullback.
Allison Sanford, then his nurse and later his wife, helps Kevin Turner change his shirt in a December 2014 photo, with the effects of ALS apparent on the former fullback.
Bob Miller for The Washington Post via Getty Images
While Kevin Turner’s wife and children wrangle over his inheritance, the children are coping with another financial challenge. Their grandfather, Raymond Turner, said Kevin Turner’s lawyer in the class-action case is wrongfully demanding an exorbitant fee from the $5 million award. Raymond is fighting the lawyer in court on the children’s behalf.

“He’s not taking the money away from me,” said Raymond. “He’s taking it away from the kids, and that ain’t right.”

Lawyers for Turner’s children declined requests to interview them.

Turner’s lawyer in the NFL case, Florida-based Steven Marks, already has been awarded more than $6 million in fees for helping to represent the class of players suing the league, including Turner. Records show Marks initially sought 40 percent, or $2 million, of Turner’s $5 million award, then asked for 25 percent ($1.25 million).

Now, Raymond Turner said, Marks wants $850,000.

Marks said by e-mail, “Our firm proudly represented Kevin Turner for more than six years. During this period, we devoted extensive time and resources to his individual case in addition to the common benefit work we did for the class. We are only seeking a fair and appropriate fee for our work.”

As the litigation continues, a court-appointed guardian for Turner’s children reported to the Alabama judge in September that he “is deeply concerned about the minor children’s future and financial stability.”

Allison Sanford Turner’s home in Dora, Ala.
Allison Sanford Turner’s home in Dora, Ala.
Meg McKinney for The Boston Globe
Turner’s children live with their mother, who said she needs to sell the family home to support them. Nolan received a football scholarship from Clemson coach Dabo Swinney, his father’s close friend and former teammate at Alabama. He is a sophomore safety preparing to play Notre Dame Dec. 29 in the Cotton Bowl, with the winner advancing to the national championship game.

But Nolan’s sister Natalie is headed to the University of Alabama next year without a scholarship, and Cole is a ninth grader at Vestavia Hills High School in suburban Birmingham.

Noticing a change in him

Joyce and Kevin Turner met in Boston in 1993, during his second season with the Patriots. A third-round draft pick out of Alabama, Turner never missed a game in his three seasons in New England. He also never shied from a collision.

The Globe dubbed him a “human wrecking ball,” and the Patriots prized him.

“He is leading us in tackles, total points, big plays, and has been extremely productive,” Dante Scarnecchia, then the special teams coach, told the Globe. “He’s just a hell of a football player.”

When Bill Parcells became Patriots head coach in 1993, his offense relied in part on Turner plowing holes for running back Leonard Russell, who gained more than 1,000 yards that year. Turner typically blocked — and tackled — by leading with his head.

“He would show his helmet with all those scars on it as evidence,” McKee said in announcing his CTE diagnosis.

Turner was honored in 1993 as the Patriots’ unsung hero.

Kevin Turner (left) in his days as a hard-hitting Patriots fullback.
Kevin Turner (left) in his days as a hard-hitting Patriots fullback.
globe file
Joyce Turner said she knew she wanted to marry him when they left a Boston nightclub one night after an outing with a group of Patriots. While everyone else walked past a homeless veteran on the sidewalk, she recalled, Turner patted him on the back, thanked him for his service, and handed him a $50 bill.

“You couldn’t find a better person, honestly, truly,” she said.

But he changed over time. Although he was always a loving father, Joyce said, Turner became more dispirited as the effects of countless head blows took a toll. She said he was cognitively deteriorating even before he finished his NFL career in 2000 after five seasons with the Philadelphia Eagles.

Turner retired with $3.8 million, Joyce said, but he lost much of it through habitual day trading: buying and selling financial securities the same day. She said he also became addicted to painkillers after multiple football-related surgeries, his once-sunny disposition further fading.

Kevin Turner bottomed out in 2003 when he was arrested for allegedly assaulting a security guard with whom he was friendly outside his hotel room in Nashville.

“I didn’t even know who he was anymore,” Joyce recalled. “Kevin knew something was wrong, too.”

They reached out to McKee as well as Ted Johnson, another former Patriot who has suffered from CTE symptoms. They got explanations but no solutions.

There are few treatments for CTE symptoms and many unanswered questions about the disease, including why some players get it and others don’t.

“Kevin immediately said, ‘I’m donating my brain,’ ” for research, Joyce Turner recalled.

He also created the Kevin Turner Foundation to raise money for research. Yet his personal finances remained in disarray, and he and Joyce divorced in 2010, around the time he filed for bankruptcy protection.

Raymond Turner said he also sought answers for his son’s faulty decisions, some of which involved commercial real estate deals in Birmingham.

“I asked Dr. McKee if the CTE affected Kevin’s decision-making, and she said, ‘Absolutely,’ ” Raymond recalled. “To me, that explains him getting married [to Sanford] and some of the other things he did.”

Diagnosed with ALS

Studies have shown a link between repetitive head trauma in football and CTE. They also have found that NFL players are at least three times more likely to develop disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and ALS.

Turner began playing tackle football when he was 5. He played every fall for the next 25 years, and he estimated that he had more than 50 concussions, two of which rendered him unconscious.

The last knockout came in 1997, when he was playing for the Eagles against the Green Bay Packers in Philadelphia. When he regained consciousness on the sideline, Turner recalled, he asked a teammate, “Are we in Philly or Green Bay?”

Kevin Turner (right) takes a hit during his days with the Eagles, in a game against the Seattle Seahawks.
Kevin Turner takes a hit during his days with the Eagles, in a game against the Seattle Seahawks.
Brad Bower/Associated Press/File 1998
According to a statement he gave a US Senate committee in 2014 through a former Alabama teammate, Turner said an Eagles doctor screened him on the sideline. One test required him to memorize four simple words and repeat them two minutes later.

“We did that test four times until I got it right,” Turner recalled.

He said he was cleared to play and eagerly returned to the game. He then participated in practice two days later “with no time to let my brain heal.”

“When I look back,” Turner testified, “I really wish I had not been so ignorant about what head trauma can do.”

He was diagnosed with ALS in 2010 at the age of 41. ALS and CTE attack the brain and spinal cord, but the effects differ. ALS patients lose control of their muscles, leading to paralysis, while their minds generally remain intact.

The opposite is true of CTE. People with CTE can suffer from a wide range of cognitive damage, from depression and aggression to dementia and suicidal thoughts, but they are far less likely to lose muscle control.

Kevin Turner in 2013.
Kevin Turner in 2013.
Matt Rourke/AP/file
After Turner died, McKee discovered that he essentially was afflicted with both diseases. She concluded from an autopsy that he died of an ALS-type disorder caused by CTE, which she had diagnosed in 16 other deceased football players.

“The severity of Mr. Turner’s CTE was extraordinary and unprecedented for an athlete who died in his 40s,” McKee said.

The NFL accepted Turner’s diagnosis of ALS, which meant his estate would receive the largest award possible under the settlement: $5 million. A payment for a CTE diagnosis is $4 million.

Nurse comes onto the scene

In 2012, Turner filed a will in which he directed that his inheritance be divided equally between his children, with his father serving as their representative.

When Turner’s ALS began to rapidly advance, his daughter Natalie, then 11, began caring for him, including injecting his medication. But when the demands became more than she could handle, Sanford was hired in 2013.

Several months later, Joyce and Kevin Turner reconciled. They bought a large home and the family reunited. Joyce said they spoke of remarrying.

Sanford remained Turner’s visiting nurse.

“Kevin liked her, and we were happy for him,” Joyce said.

Within four months, however, Joyce became suspicious about their relationship and asked Turner about it. The next day, she said, he moved back to his previous home, where his parents would also move to help care for him.

In an affidavit, Joyce said Kevin explained that he left his family “because the nurse told him that if he didn’t move out of our house, she would no longer be his nurse and he would not be able to start a relationship with her, and that scared him.”

Sanford Turner, in her answer to the civil complaint, denied that she exploited Turner or engaged in a romantic or sexual relationship with him in violation of state nursing regulations.

She stated that she became engaged to Turner in December 2014, soon after he moved out of the family home. She had divorced her husband, Dennis Reno, earlier that year.

“Kevin’s family and friends knew about our engagement,” she said. “It was not a secret.”

She submitted to the court a copy of a Washington Post story, published Dec. 15, 2014, that cited the engagement and commented on Turner’s mental condition.

“Turner’s mind is sound — his humor, personality, charm all still there,” Post reporter Rick Maese wrote.

The pastor who married them, Rev. Wade Griffith of Grace, a United Methodist congregation, stated in an affidavit that Turner was “completely lucid and coherent” at the time. Two church workers served as witnesses.

“Both Kevin and Allison seemed genuine in their commitment to one another,” Griffith said.

Two lawyers helped Turner plan his trust, which superseded his 2012 will. The lawyers also asserted in affidavits that Turner was mentally competent until his last breath.

His parents say otherwise. Raymond Turner said his son’s mental condition had declined since at least 2012.

“Kevin was totally committed to his children,” he said in an affidavit. “It was inconceivable that he was of sound mind at the time of the marriage due to his severely compromised mental and physical condition and his inability to appreciate the effect the marriage with the nurse would have on his children.”

In late November, Turner’s parents visited a football stadium in Prattville, outside Montgomery, where their son played as a child and starred in high school. The field has been named in Turner’s honor and a granite monument to him has been erected there, topped with an anvil to signify his strength and perseverance.

Kevin Turner’s grave marker.
Kevin Turner’s grave marker.
Meg McKinney for The Boston Globe
From the football stadium, the Turners traveled to their family plot at Prattville Memorial Gardens. It was a gray morning. A wintry wind whipped across the cemetery.

As they stood at their son’s grave, Myra wept and Raymond spoke of hope and faith and their son’s legacy, which endures through film documentaries: “Climb for Kevin,’’ which focuses on a group that scaled Mount Kilimanjaro to honor him, and “American Man: Kevin Turner’s Price for Gridiron Glory.”

At their feet lay Turner’s golden-engraved headstone. It bore the inscription, “Our beloved son and world’s greatest father.”

Firefighter is killed battling 5-alarm blaze in Worcester
December 09, 2018

A firefighter died battling a blaze at an apartment building in Worcester early Sunday morning.
WORCESTER — A 36-year-old Worcester firefighter was killed Sunday battling a five-alarm blaze that broke out early in the morning and swept through an apartment building on Lowell Street, Worcester Fire Chief Michael Lavoie said at a news conference.

Christopher Roy was with the department for 2 1/2 years and leaves a 9-year-old daughter, officials said Sunday morning.


Worcester Fire Department
Roy, a Shrewsbury resident, is also survived by his parents, Michele and Ronald Roy, who live in Worcester, and a brother, according to officials.

Advertisement

“On behalf of the entire Worcester Fire Department, I want to offer my condolences to the Roy family, and I would ask the media to respect the privacy of the family during this difficult time,” Lavoie said.

Get Metro Headlines in your inbox:
The 10 top local news stories from metro Boston and around New England delivered daily.
“This is a difficult day for the Worcester Fire Department, and particularly painful, as this is the week we remember and mourn the passing of Worcester firefighter Jon Davies and the six who perished in the Cold Storage Warehouse fire” he continued, citing other firefighters who died in the line of duty fighting fires in past Decembers.

It is not yet clear where or how Sunday’s blaze began. Worcester fire officials and the state fire marshal’s office are investigating the cause of the fire, according to Jennifer Mieth, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Fire Services.

Fire was initially reported in the building’s basement at 3:58 a.m., Lavoie said. Flames spread rapidly, forcing several firefighters to evacuate the second floor of the three-story building, which includes six units, he said.

“With the assistance of other crews in the rapid intervention team, five firefighters escaped over ladders. Two firefighters were transported to the local hospital,” Lavoie said.

Advertisement

One firefighter was evaluated and released, officials said.

“Fire crews were heroic in their efforts to rescue their colleagues under extreme conditions,” Lavoie said. “Every person on the fire ground gave 110 percent to try and rescue the firefighters who were in danger.”

Worcester Mayor Joseph M. Petty paid tribute to Roy at the news conference.

“Firefighter Roy paid the ultimate sacrifice ... doing what he always wanted to do: helping people and saving lives,” Petty said. “Across Worcester this morning, joy turned to sadness as the word of Christopher Roy’s death spread. In hushed tones, the citizens of our city remember his sacrifice, and the sacrifices of all our firefighters.”

Worcester City Manager Edward M. Augustus described Roy’s death as “an unimaginably devastating loss.”

Advertisement

“The loss is especially gut-wrenching in the wake of the anniversary of the Worcester Six on Dec. 3, 1999, and firefighter Davies on Dec. 7, 2011,” Augustus said. “Every day, our firefighters selflessly risk their lives without a second thought. Today they showed incredible heroism, dedication, and devotion in their efforts to save firefighter Roy.”

Flags across the state, which have been lowered in recent days following the death of former president George H.W. Bush, will remain at half-staff to honor Roy, at the order of Governor Charlie Baker.

Baker extended his condolences to Roy’s loved ones in a statement posted Sunday to Twitter, where he added, “December has been especially cruel to Worcester firefighters & their families over the years. Keep them all in your thoughts & prayers.”


Shortly before noon Sunday, Lieutenant Governor Karyn Polito arrived at the scene on Lowell Street with Worcester officials. She was taken behind a police tape blocking the road and escorted to the back of the burned building. Polito left a short while later, without taking questions from reporters.

About 15 residents of the apartment building were displaced by the conflagration, according to a spokesman for the American Red Cross. Red Cross officials were at the scene and offered shelter and assistance with necessities, according to an e-mail from Christopher Rae, a spokesman for the organization.

City property records show that the 7 Lowell St. building was built in 1900.

Congressman Jim McGovern, a Worcester Democrat, expressed sympathy for Roy, his family, and the Worcester Fire Department in a statement Sunday morning.

“I am deeply saddened to learn that Firefighter Christopher Roy passed away this morning,” the congressman said. “December is already a difficult month for the Worcester Fire Department, and this tragedy only adds to the grief we feel for heroes like Christopher who have been taken from us too soon. His family, friends, and fellow firefighters are all in my thoughts and prayers during this difficult time.”

McGovern also expressed his feelings in a pair of Twitter posts.



The Professional Fire Fighters of Massachusetts, a labor union representing more than 12,000 firefighters and emergency medical technicians across the Commonwealth, released a statement asking for prayers for Roy’s family and fellow firefighters.


The Boston Police Department said in a tweet that officers “were saddened to hear the news of a hero lost in Worcester this morning.”


December has historically been a tragic month for Worcester firefighters.


On Saturday, the department paid respects on the seventh anniversary of a three-alarm three-decker fire that killed Jon D. Davies Sr. when the building collapsed on him, according to the Worcester Fire Department website.

And nearly two decades ago, six Worcester firefighters perished in the 1999 Cold Storage Warehouse fire, among the deadliest incidents for Massachusetts firefighters. Today, the site is a fire station.

Before Sunday’s news conference, city officials formed a solemn line to one side of a podium that had been brought outside the Worcester fire headquarters on Grove Street.

Behind the speakers was a black stone memorial dedicated to the firefighters who died fighting the Cold Storage Warehouse fire.

After the press conference, city officials gathered inside an open garage bay, where several shook hands, some embraced, and some spoke quietly before the door was lowered and their mourning became private.

A poem etched on the memorial honoring the sacrifice of the firefighters killed in 1999 appeared to be a fitting tribute to Roy, as well.

“Without second thoughts / without regrets / or doubts / they stepped, / blinded by smoke, / through a door / into eternity,” the poem said.

Harvard student accused of rape far from campus sues university for investigating it
Stephanie EbbertDecember 08, 2018
Some Harvard activists say that Education Secretary Betsy DeVos’s efforts to overhaul the Title IX process are altering the landscape of sex assault investigations before they’re finalized. 
Katherine Taylor for The Boston Globe/File 2017
Some Harvard activists say that Education Secretary Betsy DeVos’s efforts to overhaul the Title IX process are altering the landscape of sex assault investigations before they’re finalized.
Does a university have the responsibility — or even the right — to investigate a claim that one of its students raped someone hundreds of miles away?

The question is central to a case filed in federal court by a Harvard University student who argues the school is overstepping its authority by investigating him for a rape allegation lodged by a nonstudent in a city where police declined to prosecute.

Saying he faces “a grave risk of being incorrectly branded a rapist,” the unnamed male Harvard student argues in the suit that the school has no jurisdiction and he wants the investigation halted.

Advertisement

The lawsuit was filed Nov. 28, less than two weeks after the Trump administration proposed revising the rules for college sex assault investigations — including by stipulating that colleges are responsible for policing misconduct that occurs only on their property or within their programs.

Get Metro Headlines in your inbox:
The 10 top local news stories from metro Boston and around New England delivered daily.
The suit signaled to some worried Harvard activists that Education Secretary Betsy DeVos’s efforts to overhaul the Title IX process are altering the landscape of sex assault investigations before they’re finalized.

“That demonstrated to me that [there are] students who see the Department of Education backing away from enforcing strong protections against sexual violence on campus and taking advantage of this political moment,” said Amelia Y. Goldberg, 21, a Harvard senior from New York City. “Title IX is about enforcing a violence-free campus.”

Like DeVos’s rewrite of the regulations, the lawsuit aims to rein in the perceived excesses of the campus disciplinary process that men’s rights advocates and civil rights attorneys have described in recent years as Kafkaesque.

Harvard’s Title IX officer launched an investigation after learning about the allegation. It’s unclear, the suit says, whether the woman sought Harvard’s investigation. But since she is not a student at Harvard — and never was — the school does not need to make accommodations to safeguard her education and presence on campus, as required by Title IX.

Advertisement

“I don’t think there’s much the school can or really should do unless the evidence is so bad that this person is deemed an obvious danger on campus,” said Robert Shibley, executive director of the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education, which has fought for greater due process in college disciplinary actions.

But women’s rights groups fighting the new federal proposal say that interpretation misunderstands the purpose of Title IX, the civil rights law that guards women’s education from sexual discrimination or harassment. Shiwali Patel, senior counsel for the National Women’s Law Center, said schools such as Harvard should know about such troubling behavior from a student — or an employee for that matter — whether on campus or off.

Imagine, Patel said, if a college learned about a rape allegation against an incoming professor relocating from a different school. “Wouldn’t you have an obligation at a school to ensure this behavior isn’t continuing against your own students?” Patel asked.

Moreover, Patel said, the new federal limit would ignore a host of behavior off campus, including sexual assaults that occur in apartments.

“Our concern is that by forcing schools to not investigate these complaints and dismiss them, they’re ignoring a lot of sexual harassment and not taking into account the reality of how often off-campus sexual harassment or sexual assault occurs,” Patel said, noting that many survivors of sexual assault eventually drop out of school. “This will exacerbate a very significant problem.”

Advertisement

The scope and reach of a college’s sexual harassment policy are at the heart of the lawsuit filed by a Harvard student identified by the pseudonym John Doe. In the suit, Doe claims he had a consensual sexual encounter in July 2017 with a fellow summer intern in an undisclosed city. The woman later filed a rape complaint with local police, who declined to prosecute, according to the lawsuit; she also filed a civil suit in that jurisdiction in March.

“The incident did not take place at Harvard, anywhere close to Harvard, or even in-state; the incident did not take place during the academic year or in connection with any Harvard program; and none of the witnesses to Mr. Doe’s knowledge were, or are, connected to Harvard in any way,” says the lawsuit.

Doe’s lawsuit argues that Harvard’s Office of Dispute Resolution does not have jurisdiction to investigate.

Harvard’s policy on sexual- and gender-based harassment does not cover off-campus behavior, except in university-recognized programs or activities. But the Faculty of Arts and Sciences — one of several colleges that fall beneath the university’s umbrella policy — has its own standard that goes further, mandating that students “behave in a mature and responsible manner.” The policy also notes that sexual misconduct will not be tolerated, even when it falls outside the jurisdiction of the universitywide policy.

Harvard paused the disciplinary proceedings on Nov. 15 — the day the US Education Department issued its proposed new rule, the suit states. But on Nov. 27, Harvard’s Title IX investigator announced the investigation would continue, with no changes to procedures, and asked Doe to appear for an interview the following day or the following week. Instead, he sued the next day.

Harvard officials would not speak to the details of the lawsuit. On the broader Title IX changes proposed by DeVos, a spokesman said the university is still reviewing them to determine how they would affect current policies and practices.

“Harvard’s top priority remains ensuring the safety and well-being of every member of our community, supported through thoughtful and fair policies and procedures,” Harvard spokesman Jonathan Swain said in a statement. “Essential to this is ensuring that all members of our community are both encouraged to report and feel comfortable in reporting incidents of sexual and gender-based harassment, including sexual assault.”

Enacted in 1972, Title IX is intended to ensure women and girls have equal opportunities at school.

In 2011, amid concerns about an unchecked rape culture on college campuses, the Obama administration tightened schools’ requirements for investigating assault and harassment and threatened to withhold federal funding from schools that were noncompliant.

But in the ensuing years, many lawyers argued the scales of justice tipped too far, with the accused not receiving due process. Many colleges did not guarantee the accused student would have a hearing, a lawyer, or the right to see evidence.

“I think that the Obama administration so egregiously overdid it,” said Janet Halley, a Harvard Law School professor. “We started out with a bad situation of underenforcement. The Obama administration corrected that by moving in the direction of overenforcement, overly broad definitions, and lack of fundamental fairness in the process.”

The changes proposed by DeVos would require colleges to hold live hearings to review the evidence in any sexual assault allegation. Many schools had adopted a “single investigator” model, in which an employee or professional hired by the Title IX officer assesses the evidence.

In addition, under DeVos’s revisions, a student accused of sexual harassment could not go unrepresented by a lawyer; the university would have to appoint a representative.

The draft rule DeVos proposed is up for public comment through Jan. 28.

House Democrats raise prospect of impeachment if Trump directed payments
December 09, 2018
WASHINGTON, DC - DECEMBER 8: (AFP OUT) U.S. President Donald Trump answers questions from the press while departing the White House December 8, 2018 in Washington, DC. Trump says White House chief of staff John Kelly will resign by the end of the year before departing for the 119th Army-Navy Football Game in Philadelphia, PA. (Photo by Olivier Douliery-Pool/Getty Images)
Getty Images
President Trump spoke at the White House on Saturday.
WASHINGTON (AP) — Top House Democrats on Sunday raised the prospect of impeachment or almost-certain prison time for President Donald Trump if it’s proved that he directed illegal hush-money payments to women, adding to the legal pressure on the president over the Russia investigation and other scandals.

‘‘There’s a very real prospect that on the day Donald Trump leaves office, the Justice Department may indict him, that he may be the first president in quite some time to face the real prospect of jail time,’’ said Rep. Adam Schiff, the incoming chairman of the House intelligence committee. ‘‘The bigger pardon question may come down the road as the next president has to determine whether to pardon Donald Trump.’’

Rep. Jerry Nadler, the incoming chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, described the details in prosecutors’ filings Friday in the case of Trump’s former personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, as evidence that Trump was ‘‘at the center of a massive fraud.’’

Advertisement

‘‘They would be impeachable offenses,’’ Nadler said.

Get Today in Politics in your inbox:
A digest of the top political stories from the Globe, sent to your inbox Monday-Friday.
In the filings, prosecutors in New York for the first time link Trump to a federal crime of illegal payments to buy the silence of two women during the 2016 campaign. Special counsel Robert Mueller’s office also laid out previously undisclosed contacts between Trump associates and Russian intermediaries and suggested the Kremlin aimed early on to influence Trump and his Republican campaign by playing to both his political and personal business interests.

Trump has denied wrongdoing and has compared the investigations to a ‘‘witch hunt.’’

Nadler, D-N.Y., said it was too early to say whether Congress would pursue impeachment proceedings based on the illegal payments alone because lawmakers would need to weigh the gravity of the offense to justify ‘‘overturning’’ the 2016 election. Nadler and other lawmakers said Sunday they would await additional details from Mueller’s investigation into Russian election interference and possible coordination with the Trump campaign to determine the extent of Trump’s misconduct.

Regarding the illegal payments, ‘‘whether they are important enough to justify an impeachment is a different question, but certainly they'd be impeachable offenses because even though they were committed before the president became president, they were committed in the service of fraudulently obtaining the office,’’ Nadler said.

Advertisement

Mueller has not said when he will complete a report of any findings, and it isn’t clear that any such report would be made available to Congress. That would be up to the attorney general. Trump on Friday said he would nominate former Attorney General William Barr to the post to succeed Jeff Sessions.

Nadler indicated that Democrats, who will control the House in January, will step up their own investigations. He said Congress, the Justice Department and the special counsel need to dig deeper into the allegations, which include questions about whether Trump lied about his business arrangements with Russians and about possible obstruction of justice.

‘‘The new Congress will not try to shield the president,’’ he said. ‘‘We will try to get to the bottom of this, in order to serve the American people and to stop this massive conspiracy — this massive fraud on the American people.’’

Schiff, D-Calif., also stressed a need to wait ‘‘until we see the full picture.’’ He has previously indicated his panel would seek to look into the Trump family’s business ties with Russia.

‘‘I think we also need to see this as a part of a broader pattern of potential misconduct by the president, and it’s that broad pattern, I think, that will lead us to a conclusion about whether it rises to the level to warrant removal from office,’’ Schiff said.

Advertisement

In the legal filings, the Justice Department stopped short of accusing Trump of directly committing a crime. But it said Trump told Cohen to make illegal payments to porn actress Stormy Daniels and former Playboy model Karen McDougal, both of whom claimed to have had affairs with Trump more than a decade ago.

In separate filings, Mueller’s team detail how Cohen spoke to a Russian who ‘‘claimed to be a ‘trusted person’ in the Russian Federation who could offer the campaign ‘political synergy’ and ‘synergy on a government level.'’’ Cohen said he never followed up on that meeting. Mueller’s team also said former campaign chairman Paul Manafort lied to them about his contacts with a Russian associate and Trump administration officials, including in 2018.

Republican Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida called the latest filings ‘‘relevant’’ in judging Trump’s fitness for office but said lawmakers need more information to render judgment. He also warned the White House about considering a pardon for Manafort, saying such a step could trigger congressional debate about limiting a president’s pardon powers.

Such a move would be ‘‘a terrible mistake,’’ Rubio said. ‘‘Pardons should be used judiciously. They’re used for cases with extraordinary circumstances.’’

Sen. Angus King, an independent from Maine and a member of the Senate intelligence committee, cautioned against a rush to impeachment, which he said citizens could interpret as ‘‘political revenge and a coup against the president.’’

‘‘The best way to solve a problem like this, to me, is elections,’’ King said. ‘‘I'm a conservative when it comes to impeachment. I think it’s a last resort and only when the evidence is clear of a really substantial legal violation. We may get there, but we’re not there now.’’

Democratic Sen. Chris Murphy of Connecticut urged Mueller to ‘‘show his cards soon’’ so that Congress can make a determination early next year on whether to act on impeachment.

‘‘Let’s be clear: We have reached a new level in the investigation,’’ Murphy said. ‘‘It’s important for Congress to get all of the underlying facts and data and evidence that the special counsel has.’’

Re-seeing Ansel Adams and his iconic photos at Boston’s Museum of Fine Arts
Murray WhyteDecember 07, 2018
“Monolith — The Face of Half Dome, Yosemite National Park” by Ansel Adams.
© The Ansel Adams Publishing Rights Trust/Courtesy of Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
“Monolith — The Face of Half Dome, Yosemite National Park” by Ansel Adams.
When you hear “Ansel Adams,” what do you see? Wait. Don’t answer. We know. It’s the very same thing so many of us do: That shimmering image of Half Dome, an imposing mound of granite looming 5,000 feet above the forest floor of Yosemite National Park, its silvery hide carved in stark contrast to the near-black sky beyond.

It’s a picture made eternal as much by Adams’s lens as by its presence on dorm-room walls, calendars, and screensavers from one corner of the continent to the other (I couldn’t find any hard numbers, but as someone who had it on his own dorm wall in tiny London, Canada, I can provide anecdotal evidence: Almost half the rooms along my hallway had it, too).

A picture so embedded in the popular consciousness is a lovely thing for any artist to achieve, but when it proves to be a barrier to the breadth of his work, that’s a problem. When that’s all you see when you think of Adams, there’s a willful myopia that needs to be remedied.

Advertisement

That’s surely the point of “Ansel Adams in Our Time,” the Museum of Fine Arts’s sprawling, nearly 200-piece exhibition, which opens Thursday. The iconic landscape photographer’s reputation as a purveyor of idealized wilderness is well-earned, but this show teases out contemporary alliances for a figure more complex than his popular image allows.

Get The Weekender in your inbox:
The Globe's top picks for what to see and do each weekend, in Boston and beyond.
On a recent walk-through, Karen Haas, the museum’s curator of photographs, let loose a knowing cringe. “I went to Yosemite for the last Adams show I did, and I couldn’t believe [the park itself] wasn’t in black and white!” she said, laughing, neatly summing up the quandry. “You just can’t do that show again. We need to see him in a contemporary context.”

Worry not, ye faithful: “Monolith,” that iconic image of Half Dome that Adams shot in 1927 while precariously perched on the aptly named Diving Board, a shelf of granite hanging over the valley floor, is right here to greet you (printed in 1962 in all its sterling majesty, Haas points out, at the height of Adams’s enterprising commercialism).

“Mount Starr King and Glacier Point, Yosemite, No. 69” by Carleton E. Watkins
Courtesy of Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
“Mount Starr King and Glacier Point, Yosemite, No. 69” by Carleton E. Watkins
“Monolith,” though, is not alone. Nearby, a cobbled-together panorama of that very same valley by Mark Klett and Byron Wolfe plasters Adams’s view into its pastiche, along with another from the pioneering 19th-century photographer Carleton Watkins. It sets a course for the entire exhibition to follow: All protestations of inviolate naturalism aside, photography has always presented a constructed view. This is neither a show of sacrilege nor of reverence, but one that situates Adams in the broader swim of his medium — both what came before and what happened next.

Watkins, a New Yorker who pushed west, drawn by the California gold rush in 1849, became an important figure for Adams to follow, but also push back against: In a standout moment, Adams’s picture of an unspoiled Yosemite Valley sits right next to Watkins’s near-identical frame. Decades before, it looked pretty spoiled. A logging road carves its way along the valley floor — a road, in the picture right next to it, Adams has taken pains to re-touch away.

Advertisement

Haas sprinkles moments like these throughout the exhibition like bread crumbs, leading you from one counterintuitive moment to the next. At the height of the Civil War, Watkins’s pictures provided the clincher for President Lincoln to designate the Yosemite Valley as the country’s first national park. By the 1920s, when Adams began his first forays into the park with photography in mind, it was a well-traveled tourist destination and not all the mythic, remote wilderness his pictures of that time suggest. One endearing element of the show is how bald-facedly it dismantles that myth: Some of Adams’s most iconic images of Yosemite were taken from the parking lot, which the show puts up front with a huge wall-size picture of Adams perched on the roof of his car with his large-format camera.

“The Tetons and Snake River, Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming” by Ansel Adams
© The Ansel Adams Publishing Rights Trust/Courtesy of Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
“The Tetons and Snake River, Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming” by Ansel Adams
The exhibition lives in such counterpoints, which deepen with each step further in. A grid of Adams’s early photos of Yosemite — pristine, immaculate, the photographer experimenting with darkroom techniques that would become his hallmark — is offset with a same-size network of pictures by the contemporary photographer Mark Ruwedel. Where Adams’s nature is untouched, Ruwedel’s is disturbed but abandoned — lonely western byways, roads or rail tracks, overgrown with brush or swallowed by desert.

In later work, Adams inflects his blindered-seeming naturalism with a blunt awareness of the dark complexities of the contemporary world. Nothing, sadly, makes an Adams show more urgently topical than looming environmental catastrophe, and with recent news that carbon emissions were set to spike by an unexpectedly large 2.7 percent for 2018, not to mention President Trump’s intention to open 9 million acres of Alaskan wilderness preserve to oil drilling, the MFA couldn’t have hoped for better timing — or worse.

“Tent-Camera Image on Ground: View of Mount Moran and the Snake River from Oxbow Bend, Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming” by Abelardo Morell
Courtesy of Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
“Tent-Camera Image on Ground: View of Mount Moran and the Snake River from Oxbow Bend, Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming” by Abelardo Morell
But Adams himself was no Pollyanna with his nose buried in the forest. Mass industrialization was in full swing when he first picked up a camera; railroads and highways were established transportation arteries. Whatever our enduring notion of him, he waded gamely into political waters (he survived the great San Francisco earthquake of 1906, emerging with only a broken nose that, he later joked, permanently skewed him toward the left.) A small space here touches on his engagement with Native American culture, bent most often by photographers of his day toward exploitive exoticization (to leave no doubt, Haas includes here a set of pictures of Native Americans, printed on playing cards by Adam Clark Vroman in 1894).

Adams, while working on a book on the Pueblo Native American tribes with the author Mary Hunter Austin, made several loose, portrait-like images of the people he met there; they’re rare examples of Adams working with human subjects, whom he captures with deferential respect. More in his milieu, and a canny companion to the content in this space, is the kind of image of typically anodyne beauty we associate most with Adams, of an ancient, long-abandoned Native American village in New Mexico. It’s haunting, in the photographer’s ghostly silver-grays; but Haas has paired it with a near-identical frame taken by Timothy H. O’Sullivan and freighted it with different meaning. O’Sullivan’s picture, from 1873, was commissioned as part of a surveyors’ project to determine which lands to expropriate from Native Americans.

Advertisement

These gestures insinuate themselves subtly throughout, though they grow bolder gallery to gallery. The main event, a large space where Adams’s commissioned pictures for the national parks share space with an array of contemporary artists, is where the old master takes the most hits: from Catherine Opie, whose glorious, soft-focus color images of mountains and waterfalls seem a direct subversion of the macho outdoorsman’s pursuit of crisp images in robust black and white; or from Newton-based artist Abelardo Morell, whose roughly-textured pictures merge a heroic Adams-esque view with the trampled grass and tourist detritus that lay beneath his feet.

“Potato Field, North Farm, Manzanar, from Photographs of Japanese-American Relocation Camp in Manzanar, California” by Ansel Adams 
Courtesy of Addison Gallery of American Art, Phillips Academy, Andover
“Potato Field, North Farm, Manzanar, from Photographs of Japanese-American Relocation Camp in Manzanar, California” by Ansel Adams
Don’t believe him, they seem to say, and Haas lets him take his lumps: The Adams pictures in this space are all smaller scale, not the huge, heroic prints you might expect. But past the parks, the show allies Adams with surprising confreres: Trevor Paglen, whose stark fogs of color reveal tiny surveillance tools — a drone here, a satellite there — or Stephen Tourlentes, whose landscapes are barren, desolate things, but for the dull glow of a maximum security prison in the wedge of two mountains.

Here, landscape isn’t heroic. It’s menacing, and Adams finds his place. On an excursion in the 1940s to photograph Mount Williamson in the Sierra Nevada range, he discovered the Manzanar Japanese internment camps, to which he gained access and committed to documenting.

The remaining work here is the least Adams-esque I’ve seen: One image, of a neoclassical angel statue surrounded by oil derricks, is pure high-modern black humor. Pictures of ghost towns and old men, rocking away on dilapidated porches, made me think of James Agee; images of snaking highway overpasses or chaotic housing developments, Stephen Shore.

We are jarred here not just with an unseen Adams, but with young photographers his work has inspired. In one huge picture, a giant back-hoe loader carves into the sand, waves breaking on its metal track as it tries to repair eroding beach along the California shore. It’s a picture by Lucas Foglia, a young photographer triggered by Adams’s mesmerizing “Surf Sequence,” an aerial view of black waves ceding to silver sand and iridescent foam along an untouched coast. At first glance, it might seem critical, like Opie’s or Morell’s, but I’m not so sure. They represent a shared hope — of damage undone, a place to return to. That’s the Ansel Adams our time needs to look to, and with clear eyes.


